
#chapter intro #aihide #folded
#section circuit based approach #folded #aihide
    Throughout history people have been asking what makes them who they are and how their consciousness works, and until recently we had little idea. The great Egyptian empire though of the brain as useless filler and other cultures though emotions were felt by the heart. We now know that the continuous input and output of information, and the resulting cognative and behavioral patterns that we identify as human conscousness results from a huge network if interconnected specialized cells called neurons. The way that these many individual units of life are connected into a huge colony of individuals gives rise to a higher form of intelligence, you. This is the most complex structure in the known universe and we are still deciphering its structure and behavior, but we have made a lot of progress. This book will give you a basic understanding not just of theory but of immediately useful patterns of human behavior and how to use them. 
    We have even been able to go so far  as to create artificial neural networks that use these same principles with complex behavior that would be very difficult or nearly impossible to program manually. Even these structures are not understood completely by the people that create them because they are the product of the harnessing of natural laws of nature similar to the ones that created us. Even though we don't fully understand these either we can understand them much more easily and it has given us a better understanding of ourselves. 
    Many layers of artificial neurons called Nodes are created and connected. Each layer is connected to nodes in the next layer. When a node in the first layer is activated it may activate nodes in the next layer, and those many activate nodes in the layer after that, continuing on until finally it gets to the output layer and the nodes that are activated in that one are the output.  The probability that a node being activated in the first layer activates specific nodes in the next layer is what changes. 
    A simple example is 2 layers of 10 nodes each. If any of the top 5 nodes in the first layer is activated they will activate the top node in the next layer. If any of the bottom 5 nodes in the first layer are activated they. This neural net converts a number from 1 to 10 into a binary of true and false. This is not super useful but a huge network can be used in the same way to do complex things like recoginze licence plates or faces, detect fraud in banks, write code, and maybe anything a biological neural net can do and more.  
     For another example, consider a neural network trained to recognize images. The input layer consists of thousands of individual nodes each receiving information about a single pixel's brightness and color values. If those nodes are activated in a certain pattern they may activate one node in the next layer that only is activated when an edge is detected. There may be many of these in a recurring pattern for edge detection in any area. When many of the edge detection nodes are activated in a certain pattern they may connect to the next layer in a way that a node may activate in the next layer that only activates when a line is detected, or a curve, or some other pattern. If a certain pattern of curves and lines and dots is detected it may activate a certain node that only activates when a smiley face is detected in that part of the input. This goes in higher levels of complexity as it goes further into the network. Understanding this we can look at the image processing of brains in humans and other animals and see the same thing happening. Certain neurons are activated when there is an edge, or a circle, or a smiley face in people. This is why we can see a smile or an animal in the clouds even though its not really there, the lower level neuron nodes are activating because that pattern is detected. 
#section evolutionary psychology #folded #aihide
    The programmer of these neural networks creates them by giving an input and expected output to a training program which randomly changes the connection values of the nodes millions of times and saves the version that has the best accuracy for that input. For the first example of two layers of 10 the initial setup would create random output from the first layer to the second layer. The program will try millions of combinations and when one is better it will save that one and then start from the new best version and create millions of variations of that until one is better. Eventually it finds a combination with a high degree of accuracy. 
    Biological naural networks were created in a very similar way. The structure of the neural network is determed by the dna in the cells of the organisim, this is the buiding plan of the brain. Small random changes in this over time creates slightly different brain structures. Many of these changes make the brain no longer work properly such as with diseases like skitsofrenia, ocd, ect, but sometimes one of these random changes actually makes it more likely that the body that the brain is guiding continues to exist, and then that gene that caused that is more likely to continue to exist. 
   For example if there is a tiny fish that can see when there is a bigger fish that wants to eat it one setup of their neural net will make them swim away from this big fish and another setup will make it swim toward the bigger fish. The genes that make it swim toward the big fish are eaten, and the ones that make it swim away are passed into the next generation so those genes survive and that setup of the neural net becomes more common because that gene becomes more common. In this way the neural network that is the brain of animals is trained over many generations. 
    In another example we see a person who is harmed or cheated by another person with no reaction. They are harmed more and cheated more until they have nothing left and they starve or never find a romantic partner and the gene causing this no longer exists. There is another person that when harmed or cheated retaliates or at least avoids the source of that harm. This second person destroys or avoids the trouble and surives to have children that also carry this defensive anger and avoidance gene. This is the source of our emotionals, this is there origin, the reason they exist, and so their purpose. This is the compass that points us in the direction of life, and away from death. When we understand their purpose we can judge to see if the way we feel and express them is really serving their purpose or if we could adjust to make them better serve their purpose. 
    Without understanding this we can be lead to death by our compas because it is calibrated to a different environment. For example a moth that uses the moon to guide its path has a huge advantage over a moth that flies blind at night so that gene propagates until all moths carry it and act this way. Then when street lamps become part of the environment the moths compass says to fly in relation to the light as if it was the far away light of the moon. This feels good to the moth, it feels like it is moving towards life, but it is really stuck in a death spiral. We see this all the time when moths and other bugs fly around and into a light, this is why they do this. The moth may feel in its little neural network that something is wrong but it does not understand what is wrong and so it dies.  Our behavior is much more complex but we follow the same pattern, and fall for many similar traps. Many people feel that something is wrong but they can't put their finger on what it is. This book may contain or lead to the answers that many people have not been able to find anywhere else. 
#section circuits and cognitions #folded #aihide
    These neural networks create patterns called circuits that do different things like circuits in an electronic device. For example the recognition of being thirsty activates a pattern that make the organisim seek water, the recognition of danger makes the animal move away from it, and the percieved pattern of joy makes a person smile. These perceived patterns are called cognitions, the network cognates them by the pattern of inputs activating a certain section of the neural network so it can create a result.    
#section consciouness  and the self #folded #aihide
     Each layer of these networks build progressively more complex representations from the simpler patterns below, with activation cascading through the network until specific recognition nodes reach threshold and identify the object and then a reaction to it. This continuous flow of input into the network from external and internal sources, the processing, and the output it what we call consciousness. One of the circuits in our mind sees a "self" and calculates a way to make this "self" continue to exist. The individual that carries the gene combination that makes this happen is much more likely to copy this gene into the future by suriving and reproducing so this pattern has carried  on through time for a long time and become very common. One of the things that this pattern sees as the "self" it makes continue is the consciousness. There are a few other "selves" it can identify with which can radically change the behavior of the person that this change has occured in. 

#section Primordial Archatypes and Culture #folded #aihide
    These default patterns that exist in the neural network because of the DNA are the basic building blocks of  psychology. We can use and maybe broden the definition of the term coined by the famous  Swiss Psychologist Carl Young and call these inbuilt patterns primordial archatypes. They behavior they create can be modified by culture which connects them together in different ways to create different effects. A whole chapter is dedicated to this and in fact many volumes could be written just about culture once one begins to understand the underlying primordial patterns that the cultural patterns play on. Most human content including writing, movies, music, speech, religion, and much more is actually just cultural communication. Most of what we call human history is just a chronology of this interaction of culture and biological neural networks causing different scenarios.
#section emotion #folded #aihide
       Many of these pattern recognitions  or "cognitions" lead to what we call emotional states. When we see a pattern of "being opressed or attacked" we call it anger and may act against the agressor, when we recognize the pattern of "winning" we feel happy and may smile or do more of what caused it, when we feel the pattern of "hunger" we call it being hungry and seek food. These states are intuitive to us because we feel them but when we clearly define them and how they are interconnected it becomes much more clear and easy to work with. We then see patterns in human behavior that were previously to hazy to make out, and when we see these patterns in oursleves and other we can create effects in them. When we see them in their basic raw form we can then also see the way they are interconnected by cultural ideas to create effects in ourselves and others, and how that creates effects in groups and entire socities. 
#section culture #folded #aihide
    rough draft: culture are stories we believe to be true. language, driving on one side of the road, a businesses, a nation, money, what is socially aceptable, how to act in different situations, what is right and wrong, examples of how these interact, how they can cause great things to happena nd bad things to happen, how we are controlled by them even when we know what we are doing is not good. how those that understand this are more in control of themselves, and how those that understand this and can create the stories that people blieve are the ones who decide the course of human history. This touches a primordial acrhatype, the archetype of percieved power, the ability to make the hting you want to happen actually happen. The one who can has everything they want, the one who does not is suject to the whims of those who can and may find themselves in a terrible or good situaiton just by luck. We live by stories, even what wer are seeing in front of us is a story. In the current moment we may have a story in our memory of a person who just threw a rock at us, or a person who just gave us 100 dollars. In the current moment we are still just looking at the same person, the same exact stimulus, but the story about that stimulus is different so we will have very different reactions. This is the power of stories, they completly control human behavior. 
#chapter emotions
    If we wish to understand ourselves, others, and how these stories control us all we must understand the basic building blocks of all of this. As we saw in the previous chapter emotional states are brought about by certain cognitions. If we list out some major emotional states, what perceived pattern causes them, and what the result of their activation is we can have a clearer view of this interaction and we can build on this to predict and understand complex emotional states. In this chapter we list out many emotions, what causes them, and what their effect is. Although we may already have an understanding of this intuitively defining and describing it explicitly makes it much easier to understand and work with. 
#section anger
    Anger causes someone to act against the thing or scenario that makes them angry, they want to stop the thing that is making them angry from happening.  
    Anger is felt when a person is harmed, cheated, or threatened. For example a mother bear seeing a person kicking one of its babies, or a person who has been stolen from. 
    To demonstrate the origin and purpose of this emotion. lets look at a person who is harmed or cheated by another person with no reaction, versus someone who does have a reaction. They first person is harmed more and cheated more until they have nothing left and they starve or never find a romantic partner and the gene causing this no longer exists. There is another person that when harmed or cheated retaliates or at least avoids the source of that harm. This second person destroys or avoids the trouble and so survives to have children that also carry this defensive anger and avoidance gene. 
    When is the oldest common ancestor that we share this gene with? Lets look at all of the organisms that act in this way, considering that there may also be convergent evolution, to see when the first in our ancestor that started to act this way was. It may be back before mammals even existed and it so it may be said to be part of the reptilian brain. The same may be true for power seeking and mating behavior. 

#section fear
    Fear is an emotional response to perceived danger or threat that prepares the body for protective action. It heightens awareness and triggers physiological changes like increased heart rate and adrenaline. tests  
    Fear arises when we encounter potential harm, uncertainty, or situations where we feel vulnerable or out of control. Examples include facing physical danger, anticipating negative outcomes, or confronting the unknown.
    The evolutionary purpose of fear is survival - it keeps us alert to threats and motivates avoidance of dangerous situations. Early humans who felt fear when encountering predators were more likely to survive and pass on their genes.
    In relationships, understanding fear helps us recognize when others feel threatened or insecure. Creating safety through consistency, clear communication, and emotional support can help alleviate unnecessary fears.

#section sadness
    Sadness is an emotional state characterized by feelings of loss, disappointment, or grief. It often involves withdrawal and reflection.
    Sadness occurs when we experience loss, failure, separation, or when our expectations are not met. It can range from mild disappointment to deep grief.
    Evolutionarily, sadness may serve social functions - signaling need for support and strengthening social bonds through mutual care during difficult times.
    When others experience sadness, offering presence without pressure, validating their feelings, and providing practical support can be more helpful than trying to 'fix' their sadness.

#section love
ai written content
    Love is one of the most powerful emotional circuits in the human neural network, serving as the foundation for bonding, cooperation, and social survival. This complex pattern recognition activates when we perceive consistent care, mutual vulnerability, and shared positive experiences with another being. aa 
    The evolutionary origins of love trace back to our earliest mammalian ancestors who needed strong bonds for offspring survival. Parental love ensured care for vulnerable young, while pair bonding increased reproductive success through cooperative parenting. Social love within groups created the cooperation networks that made human civilization possible.
    In modern relationships, understanding love as a neural circuit helps us recognize that it requires consistent activation through shared experiences, mutual care, and emotional availability. The circuit strengthens through repeated positive interactions and weakens when neglected or through negative experiences.
    Practical applications include creating regular opportunities for positive shared experiences, expressing appreciation consistently, being emotionally available during difficult times, and maintaining physical connection through appropriate touch and presence.
    Love is a complex emotional state involving deep affection, attachment, and care for others. It encompasses romantic love, familial love, and platonic love.
    Love develops through consistent positive interactions, shared experiences, vulnerability, and mutual care. It grows through investment of time and emotional energy.
    From an evolutionary perspective, love promotes bonding between mates, parents and children, and group members - all essential for survival and reproduction.
    Expressing love involves both words and actions: showing appreciation, being emotionally available, making sacrifices for the other's wellbeing, and maintaining connection through challenges.

#section trust
    Trust is the confidence in another's reliability, integrity, and good intentions. It forms the foundation of secure relationships.
    Trust develops through consistent behavior, honesty, reliability, and demonstrated care over time. It grows when actions match words and when vulnerabilities are respected.
    Evolutionarily, trust enables cooperation and division of labor - essential for human survival. Groups with high trust could accomplish more together than individuals alone.
    Building trust requires consistency, transparency, and following through on commitments. Repairing broken trust involves acknowledging mistakes and demonstrating changed behavior.

#section empathy
    Empathy is the ability to understand and share the feelings of others. It involves both cognitive understanding and emotional resonance.
    Empathy arises when we actively listen, imagine others' perspectives, and connect their experiences to our own emotional understanding.
    Evolutionarily, empathy promotes social cohesion and cooperation. Those who could understand others' needs and intentions had better social outcomes and group survival.
    Developing empathy involves practicing active listening, asking open-ended questions, and suspending judgment. It strengthens relationships by creating emotional connection and understanding.

#section gratitude
    Gratitude is the appreciation for benefits received from others or from circumstances. It involves recognizing and valuing positive aspects of life.
    Gratitude emerges when we consciously notice and appreciate kindness, beauty, opportunities, or positive relationships in our lives.
    Evolutionarily, gratitude strengthens social bonds and encourages reciprocal kindness - behaviors that enhance group survival and cooperation.
    Practicing gratitude involves regularly acknowledging what we appreciate in others and in our lives. Expressing gratitude strengthens relationships and increases overall wellbeing.
#section joy  
    Joy is felt when we experience success, acceptance, mutual cooperation, or when we feel valued and understood by others. It serves as positive reinforcement for behaviors that increase our chances of survival and reproduction.
    The evolutionary purpose of joy is to reinforce behaviors that are beneficial for survival and social bonding. When early humans found food, formed alliances, or successfully cared for offspring, the feeling of joy made them more likely to repeat these life-sustaining behaviors.
#section pleasure #folded
    Pleasure is experienced through sensory inputs like taste, touch, and social connection. It differs from joy in being more immediate and sensory-based, while joy is often more complex and tied to meaningful experiences.

    The evolutionary function of pleasure is to ensure we engage in essential survival activities. The pleasure of eating ensures we consume nutrients, the pleasure of social connection ensures we form bonds for protection and cooperation, and the pleasure of intimacy ensures reproduction.
updated
These are patterns that when cognated cause an effect, either emotionally or behavioral
#section happy #folded
success
accepted 
accepted by a group
were valued
loved
helped someone
saved someone
mutual cooperation
free and alive
understood
winning
#section sad #folded
rejected
outcast  
loosing
#section anger   #folded
betrayed
opressed 
supressed
unjustly accused
misunderstood
#section fustration #folded
when we are trying to do somehtign over and over and it is not working
it results in anger, maybe attack it with less care for the way you "should do it", maybe throw it away, etc

#chapter culture #folded #aihide
#section the origin, evolution, and purpose of culture #folded #aihide
what makes a culture true and effective and what does not
the meme Robert Dawkins
Humans are so successful because we are culturalists, it is how we cooperate

#chapter psychological phenomenon #aihide #folded

#section justifying #aihide #folded
feeling an emotion first then justifying it
#section projecting #aihide #folded
feeling self conscious about something and then calling other people that thing
#section self sabotage #aihide #folded
when someone feels guilt they do this to protect the others around them because of group evolutionary pressures being more important than individual selective pressures in many cases

#chapter interesting story telling #folded #aihide
an accusation, mystery or trial
character developmnent
working together
opinions 
sexual 
characters reacting to situations with emotions and behaviors, especially when there is danger or power dynamics involved
anything that elicits emotions 
why these things are interesting from an evolutionary perspective, those who were interested in these were more likely to survive because they paid attention to certain things and learned from them
the roles we plan in reference to the story, the role is the story. what makes someone a "casheer" versus a customer. could they not just switch places and both do their part in the same way, sure, but does this ever happen? probably not very often, this is how powerful the sotories are. 

#Chapter 3 Understanding Emotions for Better Relationships #folded #aihide
#Section Joy #folded #aihide
Definition: Joy is a positive emotion characterized by feelings of happiness, delight, and contentment that arises from positive experiences and connections.
What creates joy: Celebrating achievements, quality time with loved ones, shared laughter, meaningful compliments, beautiful experiences, and acts of kindness.
Relationship application: To create joy in others, celebrate their successes genuinely, plan fun activities together, give specific compliments, share beautiful moments, and create traditions of appreciation.
Story: A young artist finally sells their first painting after years of practice, feeling overwhelming accomplishment as friends throw a surprise celebration.
#Section Fear #folded #aihide
Definition: Fear is a primal emotion triggered by perceived danger or threat, preparing the body for protective responses.
What creates fear: Uncertainty, physical danger, vulnerability, past trauma, major life changes, and feeling unprepared or out of control.
Relationship application: To help others with fear, provide reassurance, create safety through consistency, listen without judgment, offer practical support, and respect boundaries while being available.
Story: A hiker encounters a bear but feels relief when their companion calmly guides them to safety, demonstrating how presence and competence ease fear.
#Section Anger #folded #aihide
Definition: Anger is an intense emotional state involving strong discomfort and antagonism toward perceived wrongs or injustices.
What creates anger: Injustice, disrespect, broken promises, feeling unheard, boundary violations, and unmet needs or expectations.
Relationship application: When addressing anger, validate the underlying hurt, listen actively, acknowledge valid points, avoid defensiveness, and work together on solutions rather than blame.
Story: An employee discovers credit theft but instead of exploding, requests a private meeting where both parties can express perspectives and find resolution.
#Section Sadness #folded #aihide
Definition: Sadness is emotional pain associated with loss, disadvantage, grief, or disappointment - a natural response to difficult experiences.
What creates sadness: Loss of loved ones, relationship endings, unmet expectations, disappointment, loneliness, and witnessing suffering.
Relationship application: Support others in sadness by being present without fixing, offering practical help, remembering important dates, checking in consistently, and creating space for grief without pressure to 'move on'.
Story: A woman grieving her grandmother finds comfort when friends simply sit with her, share memories, and bring meals without demanding conversation.
#Section Love #folded #aihide
Definition: Love is a complex emotion involving deep affection, attachment, care, and commitment toward others.
What creates love: Consistent care, vulnerability, shared experiences, mutual respect, emotional availability, and intentional acts of service and appreciation.
Relationship application: Express love through consistent small actions, active listening, remembering important details, showing up during difficult times, and speaking appreciation regularly.
Story: A couple maintains their connection through weekly coffee dates where they share highs and lows, creating space for vulnerability and understanding.
#Section Trust #folded #aihide
Definition: Trust is the confidence in another's reliability, integrity, and commitment to your well-being.
What creates trust: Consistency between words and actions, reliability, honesty even when difficult, confidentiality, and demonstrated care over time.
Relationship application: Build trust by following through on promises, being transparent, admitting mistakes, respecting boundaries, and showing up consistently in both good and hard times.
Story: Friends maintain trust for decades by always keeping confidences, showing up during crises, and speaking truth with kindness.
#Section Empathy #folded #aihide
Definition: Empathy is the ability to understand and share the feelings of another, creating emotional connection.
What creates empathy: Active listening, curiosity about others' experiences, vulnerability in sharing our own feelings, and perspective-taking.
Relationship application: Practice empathy by listening without interrupting, validating feelings without solving, asking open-ended questions, and reflecting back what you hear to ensure understanding.
Story: A manager transforms team dynamics by starting meetings with 'How is everyone really doing?' and genuinely listening to the answers.
#Section Gratitude #folded #aihide
Definition: Gratitude is the appreciation for benefits received, fostering positive connections and mutual appreciation.
What creates gratitude: Noticing small kindnesses, reflecting on positive aspects of relationships, and recognizing others' efforts and qualities.
Relationship application: Express gratitude specifically and regularly, acknowledge efforts others make, write thank-you notes, and create rituals of appreciation in your relationships.
Story: A family maintains a 'gratitude jar' where they note appreciations for each other, reading them together monthly.ma


#chapter Action

You can not understand people by sitting alone with the pages of a book. You must interact, you must affect the emotions and opinions of others. You must effect the stories they believe and their behavior. You must build emotional attachments and loyalties and test those loyalties. You must play immersive stimulating social and emotional games. 

The man in a prison cell who spends his days looking at grey walls and maybe looking outside of a window can not understand or each anything about the world. You can not run before you can walk, and you can not walk before you can crawl, and you can not learn to crawl while you are chained to a pole like a venesan calf. You must take action and move and practice. 


